

===== Page 1 =====

Principles of nursing 
assessment
Naomi Elliott
School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland1
Contents
Introduction  3
The purpose of nursing assessment  3
Assessment frameworks  4
Methods of assessment  6
Rapid assessment of the acutely  
ill patient  8Documenting patient assessment and  
record-keeping  9
Conclusion  10
References  10
This chapter will examine the WHY, WHAT, HOW questions of nursing assessment. It will enable you 
to ask:
• Why  – to explain the purpose of nursing assessment and why it is vital to quality patient care
• What  – to consider what patient information is collected and the rationale for using an assessment 
framework
• How  – to identify a range of methods available to assess patients and collect information that 
support clinical decision-making and individualised patient care plans.Learning outcomes
Fundamentals of Medical-Surgical Nursing: A Systems Approach , First Edition. Edited by Anne-Marie Brady, Catherine McCabe, 
and Margaret McCann.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

===== Page 2 =====

Principles of nursing assessment  Chapter 1
3Introduction
Assessment is the first step in determining the condition of the patient’s health and their immediate 
and long-term needs. The nursing assessment of patients on admission to hospital or on attendance 
at clinics is key to clinical decision-making and to planning patient care that takes account of the indi -
vidual patients’ needs and circumstances. Nurses have responsibility for carrying out the initial and 
ongoing patient assessments, for initiating interventions that take patients’ needs into consideration 
and for evaluating the effectiveness of these interventions.
The nursing assessment is one component within a larger, multidisciplinary team assessment during 
which the patient is assessed by different healthcare professionals as part of the care pathway and 
patient referral process. A multifactorial assessment of the older person for falls, for example, can 
involve the nurse, doctor, physiotherapist, occupational therapist, optician and other healthcare profes -
sionals working in specialist areas of practice such as cardiac assessment. As a member of the multi -
disciplinary team, the nurse often plays a key role in coordinating the patient assessment and ensuring 
that appropriate referrals are made and followed up.
The principles of nursing assessment presented in this chapter are in line with the national guidelines 
from the professional nursing board in Ireland, An Bord Altranais , and in the UK the Nursing and Mid -
wifery Council (NMC). The principles need to be read in conjunction with local policies and procedures 
for the nursing assessment, which are usually set by the hospital or healthcare employer. At ward or 
unit level, more specific assessment procedures may apply; for example, cerebrovascular or stroke units 
may include an assessment of swallowing and mood as part of the assessment of a patient newly 
diagnosed with a cerebrovascular accident – a stroke.
The purpose of nursing assessment
Assessment is the first stage in the nursing process and is key to developing a care plan that is tailored 
to a patient’s individual needs (Figure 1.1).
The purpose of assessment is to achieve the following:
• Obtain baseline data and track changes. On admission to hospital or on a first visit to the clinic, 
it is important to carry out a comprehensive assessment of the patient to establish a set of baseline 
data against which subsequent assessments can be compared and any changes indicating a dete -
rioration or improvement in the patient’s condition tracked.
• Early recognition of the critically ill or deteriorating patient. Identifying patients who are ‘at 
risk’ is key to initiating a rapid response from the medical emergency or rapid response team. 
‘Track and Trigger’ (e.g. Alert® and other early warning systems) incorporate objective physiologi -
cal and subjective criteria that can be used to support the nurse’s decision about when to call the 
medical team for help and avert more serious patient emergencies (National Institute for Health 
and Clinical Excellence [NICE], 2007). If a Track and Trigger system has not been set up in the 
hospital, a nurse who is concerned about a patient should take urgent action and notify the 
medical team.
• Risk assessment. Assessment is the first step in preventing complications, the aim being to iden -
tify patients who are ‘at risk’ of developing complications associated with their healthcare problem, 
hospitalisation and reduced mobility. Key areas for risk assessment include pressure ulcers, infec -
tion, falls and constipation. Local hospital policy may include risk assessment tools as part of the 
admission procedure, for example the Braden, Waterlow and Norton scores to identify patients at 
risk of pressure ulcers and to activate an action plan and interventions to prevent pressure ulcers 
developing.
• Screening for health problems. Nursing assessment provides an ideal opportunity for health 
promotion and for screening patients for risk factors associated with obesity, cancer, cardiovascular 
disease, diabetes mellitus and other major Irish and UK health problems. It also provides the 
opportunity to screen for specific problems such as emotional distress or organisms important in 
infection control (e.g. methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus  [MRSA] and vancomycin-resistant 
Enterococcus  [VRE]).

===== Page 3 =====

Part 1  Common Principles Underlying Medical and Surgical Nursing Practice
4
• Identify actual and potential problems and prioritise care. The patient’s current problems (actual 
problems) and problems that could develop in the future (potential problems) need to be identi -
fied so that the care plan can be tailored to individual patient needs. Importantly, once the range 
of patient problems has been identified, care can be prioritised so that major problems are dealt 
with first.
• Care planning, tailored to individual patient needs. The purpose of assessment is not only to 
determine and document the patient’s current condition, but also to provide evidence for the 
planning and provision of nursing care. Although standardised care plans are available in some 
units or hospitals, the nursing actions that are required to meet a patient’s needs and problems 
should be tailored to take account of individual patient needs.
• Discharge planning. Patient assessment also includes the early identification of patients’ needs 
for forward planning and organising the supports and community services necessary to facilitate 
a timely discharge from hospital. Recent trends indicate that patients’ stay in hospital is shortening, 
the use of day surgery is increasing, and policies on early discharge and discharge planning are 
setting the standards for healthcare practice (Capelastegui et al . 2008; Saczynski et al . 2010; Shep -
perd et al . 2010). Although the reasons for a delay in discharging the patient home from hospital 
are multifactorial, patient assessment that includes information about the patient’s home and 
social circumstances, family and community supports will help prevent problems arising from a 
poor knowledge of a patient’s home situation or the support available, and will avert delays related 
to non-medical reasons.
Assessment frameworks
An important principle underpinning the nursing approach to patient assessment is that it is systematic, 
comprehensive and person-centred. Many of the assessment frameworks used in clinical practice are 
linked to nursing theories such as the activities of living (Roper et al . 2000) or the self-care deficit theory 
of nursing (Orem 2001), or to other theory including Maslow’s (1999) hierarchy of needs.
Nursing models and theories serve as a guide for clinical practice and provide for a structured 
approach insofar as they map out what areas to include in a patient assessment. The number of new 
or modified assessment frameworks for nursing practice is ever increasing, but a common feature 
across different nursing assessments is the inclusion of the core aspects of physical, psychosocial and 
spiritual assessment within the context of family, community and environment (Figure 1.2). The deci -
sion of which assessment framework to use is made by healthcare organisations and nursing manage -
ment, who then oversee its implementation in their admission procedures and nursing documentation. 
This is important because it provides a way of assuring a standardised approach to nursing assessment 
and quality patient care.Figure 1.1  Assessment – the first stage in the process of planning patient care.Care deliveryIdentify patient needs
and problems
Identify priorities of careAssessment
Evaluation
Individualised patient
care plan 

===== Page 4 =====

Principles of nursing assessment  Chapter 1
5
In terms of how this translates into practice and what information is gathered during the nursing 
assessment, the broad areas to consider include biographical and health data, a systematic review of 
patient systems and functions, and a social assessment:
• Biographical and health data. Obtaining information about the patient’s health history is vital for 
putting the current problem or illness into context (Kaufman 2008).
Assessment of . . . . . . in relation to the following aspects
The patient’s understanding of the reason 
for admission
Biographical and contact details
Religion
Past medical and surgical history
Previous history of healthcare-
associated infections, e.g. MRSA, VRE and 
Clostridium difficile
Allergies
Drugs and medications
The patient’s knowledge of hospital policy, 
such as visiting, patients’ property and 
valuablesIdentifying significant information that 
affects current health status and 
care-planning
• Patient assessment. This involves a ‘head-to-toe’ systematic review of the patient. A review of 
systems and functions enables the nurse to elicit information about problems and provide vital 
clues to support a clinical diagnosis or uncover a problem of which the patient is unaware. The 
depth of the patient assessment will depend on the patient’s condition and the urgency of the 
clinical situation (Tagney 2008).
Assessment of . . . . . . in relation to the following aspects
Breathing; smoking history
Cardiovascular system
Communication
Diet, nutrition and hydration
Elimination
Mobility
Personal hygiene
Skin condition
Sleep patterns
Sexual health
Concerns, anxieties, fears and moodThe key problem as identified by the patient
Changes in function
Coping strategies in dealing with changes
Level of dependence/independence
The patient’s normal activity, function and 
behaviour
Health beliefs and lifestyle behaviour
Preventive health measures including 
screening and immunisationFigure 1.2  Key aspects to include in a patient assessment.Psychosocial 
Spiritual Physical 
Community EnvironmentFamily

===== Page 5 =====

Part 1  Common Principles Underlying Medical and Surgical Nursing Practice
6• Social assessment. Taking a social history enables an early identification of patients’ needs and 
problems that might delay discharge from hospital. Social history-taking is not always considered 
a priority in acute healthcare services, but it helps nurses to identify the patient’s needs so that 
appropriate referrals can be made to the health and social services and service delivery is coordi -
nated (Atwal 2002).
Assessment of . . . . . . in relation to the following aspects
Marital status
Occupation
Whether the patient is living alone or with 
others, has a carer or is providing care for 
another person
Social networks and supports
Housing or accommodation situation
Informal support from family, neighbours 
or voluntary community groups
Current community or home services 
– does the patient have a home help or 
meals-on-wheels, go to a day centre or 
receive support from a public health (or 
community) nurse or other personnel?
Access to shops for food, chemist, doctor, 
dentist, health clinic, bank/post office
Access to exercise or sports facilitiesImpact of the health problem on work, 
day-to-day living, lifestyle and family
Coping strategies – how the patient 
currently manages to deal with problem
Current supports used by the patient
Identification of unmet support service 
needs
Methods of assessment
The methods of assessment that are used to gather the information for clinical decision-making include 
interviewing the patient and obtaining a health history, carrying out a physical examination, making 
clinical observations and using risk assessment tools.
Interviewing and obtaining a health history
Taking a patient history is an essential part of assessment as an accurate history can provide over 80% 
of the information required for diagnosis (Epstein et al . 2008). Obtaining an accurate history is not just 
about asking a list of questions, but also requires establishing an effective patient–nurse relationship 
in which the patient feels that the nurse is interested in understanding their healthcare problems (Elliott  
2010). This involves putting patients at their ease, providing as much privacy as possible, ensuring the 
nurse is familiar with any information already gathered, being sensitive to cultural differences and 
inviting patients to tell their story (Tagney 2008).
Once the introductions have been completed, obtaining a health history begins with inviting the 
patient to tell their story and using an open question such as, ‘ Can you tell me what has brought you 
here today? ’ After an explanation has been given, the nurse moves to asking key and targetted ques -
tions to build up a comprehensive picture of the patient’s problem: ‘ How  has it affected you? Have 
you noticed what makes it worse or what helps? Have you noticed any changes in . . . ? How does this 
compare with previous times you have had this problem?’  More targetted questions are used to focus 
on eliciting whether there are any associated symptoms so the nurse needs to be familiar with the 
patterns associated with specific health problems.
Investing in the end of the interview and considering the closing questions is vital to ensuring ongoing 
continuity in the patient–nurse relationship in future consultations. Ending the interview involves Visit www.wileyfundamentalseries.com/medicalnursing  and read Reflective Question 1.1  to think 
more about this topic.

===== Page 6 =====

Principles of nursing assessment  Chapter 1
7summarising, framing information using the patient’s perspective and providing opportunity for the 
patient to add further information. A closing question such as ‘ Is there anything else we haven’t covered 
that you would like to discuss? ’ enables patients to provide additional information. During the first 
nurse–patient encounter, some patients may find it difficult to disclose problems and may be unwilling 
to do so until they know and have established a trusting relationship with the nurse. One helpful way in 
which the nurse can let the patient know there will be further opportunities to discuss issues is by saying, 
for example, ‘ If you think of anything else later on, let me know and we can have a chat then .’
Physical examination
Physical examination provides objective data and is used to corroborate evidence gathered from the 
patient interview and clinical observation. Examination involves measurement of the ‘ vital signs ’, includ -
ing temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate and blood pressure. The patient’s weight  is recorded and, 
if indicated, the patient’s body mass index may also be calculated to determine whether the patient has 
a normal weight or is under- or overweight. Urinalysis  using a dipstick reagent strip and a clean sample 
of fresh urine from the patient is used to screen for abnormal substances such as glucose or protein. Any 
abnormalities detected in the urinalysis should be followed up by more specific laboratory tests to 
investigate the cause and perhaps detect a previously undiagnosed condition such as diabetes mellitus. 
The patient’s skin condition is examined; in addition to carrying out a pressure ulcer risk assessment, 
any abnormalities such as the presence of bruises, rashes and peripheral oedema are noted.
Clinical observation
Observation is an integral part of patient assessment as it provides an additional layer of information 
gathered during the patient–nurse interaction, physical examination and routine ward-based tests. 
Observation provides a means of gathering vital indicators about the patient’s condition and well-being, 
and this information contributes to the overall evidence supporting clinical decision-making.
During the interaction with the patient, the nurse takes note of non-verbal cues. Indicators of patient 
anxiety or distress can prompt the nurse to investigate further using gentle questioning or to return 
for a follow-up visit if the patient is unwilling or not ready to discuss their problems at that time. 
Observing patients as they walk around the ward, move from chair to bed, get dressed and close 
buttons or zips can provide important information about their mobility, balance and dexterity. Observ -
ing the patient’s general appearance includes noting the colour of the face and body and any abnormal 
signs such as nasal flaring, which can indicate respiratory distress. Abnormal smells or odours such as 
the odour of ketones on the patient’s breath may indicate fasting or diabetic ketoacidosis. Observing 
the patient’s behaviour noting inappropriate responses and actions can indicate neurological, meta -
bolic, endocrine or mental health problems.
Information gathered from observing the patient is used along with that assimilated from the patient 
interview and physical examination to make sense of the patient’s health problem and to support clini -
cal decision-making.
Assessment tools
Nurses can make use of a range of assessment tools and rating scales as part of their assessment of 
the patient. These provide a standardised approach to assessing specific aspects of the patient’s condi -
tion that can otherwise be difficult to measure (Table 1.1).
The Glasgow Coma Scale (Teasdale & Jennett 1974), for example, provides a means of assessing a 
patient who is becoming increasingly drowsy and unresponsive and, importantly, enables nurses to com -
municate the findings in a way that other healthcare professionals will understand. Using the Glasgow 
Coma Scale, the patient is assessed on three specific items of (1) best eye-opening, (2) best verbal 
response, and (3) best motor response. The patient’s response on each of these items is converted into a 
numerical score, with the total score used to determine the level of consciousness.
The Early Warning Score (EWS; McGaughey et al . 2007) is an example of another type of tool that 
not only measures the patient’s status, but also identifies an action plan for the healthcare professional 

===== Page 7 =====

Part 1  Common Principles Underlying Medical and Surgical Nursing Practice
8
to follow. In the EWS, the physiological parameters are set and used to initiate further interventions. 
For example, if a patient’s temperature exceeds a predetermined level, blood cultures will be taken.
Other assessment tools are used to identify patients at risk, for example, of developing pressure 
ulcers. These predictive tools help nurses to identify at-risk patients so that interventions can be put 
in place to prevent pressure ulcers occurring. Pressure ulcer risk assessment tools are, however, only 
one component of risk assessment. Gould et al . (2002) found that tools such as the Braden, Waterlow 
and Norton scales are not always accurate as they can either over- or underpredict risk. Therefore, 
pressure ulcer risk assessment tools serve as guides, and the nurse’s own clinical judgement should 
also be taken into consideration.
Patient self-assessment tools are also available whereby patients use a visual analogue scale or brief 
questionnaire to assess themselves. The pain thermometer is one example – on this, the patient scores 
how severe the pain is by using a rating scale of 1–10 where 1 is no pain and 10 is the worst pain 
imaginable. Another example of such a tool is the patient distress self-assessment tool developed by 
the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (2011) in America. This uses a distress ‘thermometer’ 
along with a tick box checklist of practical, family, emotional and physical problems and spiritual or 
religious concerns encountered with cancer patients.
Rapid assessment of the acutely ill patient
A full patient assessment that includes a detailed review of physical, psychosocial and preventive health 
needs, a physical examination and routine tests can take several hours to complete. An in-depth assess -
ment requires time and is appropriate for elective, non-emergency cases and for patients on their first 
visit or admission to the hospital or clinic. Given that nurses also work in acute care situations, however, Table 1.1  Examples of assessment tools and rating scales
Assessment aspect Assessment tools and rating scales
Level of 
consciousnessGlasgow Coma Scale (Teasdale & Jennett 1974)
AVPU (Alert, Voice, Pain, Unresponsive; McNarry & Goldhill 2004)
Acutely ill or patient 
deterioratingAlert® (Smith 2003)
Manchester Triage Scale (Manchester Triage Group 2006)
Early Warning Score (McGaughey et al . 2007)
Pressure ulcer risk Braden scale (Bergstrom et al . 1987)
Waterlow score (Waterlow 2005)
Norton score (Norton et al . 1975)
Moving and handling Manual Handling Assessments in Hospitals and the Community: An RCN Guide  
(Royal College of Nursing 2003)
Falls Falls – the Assessment and Prevention of Falls in Older People  (NICE 2004)
Pain Pain thermometer – numeric rating scale
Abbey Pain Scale for patients who are unable to verbalise or articulate their 
needs (Abbey et al . 2004)
Patient distress National Comprehensive Cancer Network Guidelines
Distress Management , Version 1.2011 (National Comprehensive Cancer 
Network 2011)
Bowel elimination Bristol Stool Form Chart (Lewis & Heaton 1997, © 2000 Norgine Ltd.)
Rome III criteria (Longstreth et al . 2006)
Eton scale for constipation (Kyle et al . 2005)

===== Page 8 =====

Principles of nursing assessment  Chapter 1
9rapid assessment skills are also important, especially as the early recognition of a deterioration in the 
critically ill or unstable patient is vital to managing the care of such acutely ill individuals. Depending 
on how acute or unstable the patient’s condition is, some examples of rapid assessment systems are 
outlined here.
‘Track and Trigger’
Delays in recognising patients who are acutely ill on admission to hospital or in detecting clinical dete -
rioration during their hospital stay can result in serious consequences. An analysis of 425 patient deaths 
that occurred in UK acute hospitals in 2005 showed that 64 deaths were related to a failure to detect 
and recognise changes in patients’ vital signs, a failure to act upon the worsening vital signs or delays 
in the patient receiving medical attention (National Patient Safety Agency 2007).
To avoid delays in the detection and recognition of acute illness and in starting appropriate inter -
ventions, NICE (2007) recommends that a physiological Track and Trigger system is used to monitor 
all adult patients in acute hospital care settings. NICE recommends that the patient’s heart rate, 
respiratory rate, systolic blood pressure, level of consciousness, oxygen saturation and temperature 
are monitored and that key changes in these physiological observations are used to trigger a response. 
The response to a low score involves increasing the frequency of observations and alerting the nurse 
in charge to changes in the patient’s condition. The response to a medium score involves making an 
urgent call to the patient’s primary medical team, and the response to a high score involves making 
an emergency call to the medical team, which includes a doctor skilled in assessing critically ill 
patients and in advanced airway management and resuscitation skills. In addition to initiating appro -
priate interventions, the Track and Trigger system includes information about when to transfer the 
patient to the critical care area for ongoing care.
Alert®
For use in situations in which a patient is deteriorating, some hospitals have introduced the Alert® 
system for rapid assessment of the critically ill patient. This acts as a decision-making tool to alert 
healthcare professionals to patients who are acutely ill, to determine the level of urgency and to know 
when to call the emergency medical team. The Alert® framework (Smith 2003) is just one example of 
a rapid and systematic approach to assessment that trains healthcare professionals to rapidly assess a 
patient whose condition is deteriorating. It follows an ABCDE sequence in which A is airway, B is breath -
ing, C is circulation, D is disability (neurological assessment including assessment of the level of con -
sciousness and/or use of the Glasgow Coma Scale) and E is exposure  (anything that may contribute to 
the patient’s deterioration).
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
In emergency, cardiac arrest and life-threatening situations in which the patient is unresponsive, the 
immediate priorities are to assess the patient for signs of life (Resuscitation Council UK 2010). If the 
patient shows no signs of life, the nurse calls the resuscitation team and if no carotid pulse is present, 
starts cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Once these priorities have been addressed, other important 
assessments can then be made.
Documenting patient assessment  
and record-keeping
After assessing the patient, it is important that nurses record their findings and so provide documentary 
evidence about the patient’s condition. This written information is vital for providing baseline data and 
ensuring continuity of patient care. It provides information that other nurses and healthcare profes -
sionals can refer to when planning and coordinating patient care. Although patient assessment forms 
and nursing documentation are set by local hospital policy and procedures, the national professional 
guidelines for recording nursing practice and patient assessment advise the following:

===== Page 9 =====

Part 1  Common Principles Underlying Medical and Surgical Nursing Practice
10• An accurate assessment of the person’s physical, psychological and social well-being, and, when -
ever necessary, the views and observations of family members in relation to that assessment’ 
should be included in a patient record. ( An Bord Altranais  2002, p. 2)
• Evidence in relation to the planning and provision of nursing care should be included as part of a 
patient record. ( An Bord Altranais  2002, p. 2)
• Record details of any assessment and reviews undertaken, and provide clear evidence of the 
arrangements made for future and ongoing care. This should also include details of information 
given about care and treatment. (NMC 2009, p. 4)
The information gathered from an assessment when the patient is first admitted to hospital or first 
visits an outpatient clinic needs to be recorded. It provides the evidence to support clinical decisions 
and a rationale for the individualised patient care plan. Ongoing or continuous patient assessment 
when monitoring to evaluate changes in a patient’s condition in changing circumstances also needs to 
be recorded, and nursing actions documented. Nursing assessment may also identify patient problems 
that need to be referred for further assessment by an appropriate healthcare professional such as a 
physiotherapist, dietitian, social worker, speech therapist or occupational therapist.
The importance of nursing documentation is emphasised by policy-makers and professionals  
in Ireland ( An Bord Altranais , 2002), the UK (NMC, 2009) and internationally (Wang et al . 2011). 
However, evidence from a review of quality audits of nursing documentation in actual clinical practice 
has revealed some deficiencies (Wang et al . 2011). Although documentation does not always capture 
the full extent of what happens in actual nursing practice, Wang et al . found several studies that 
revealed insufficient recording of psychological, social, cultural and spiritual aspects of care. Other 
deficiencies highlighted by these authors included a lack of documentation of the patient’s vital signs, 
diagnosis leading to hospitalisation, assessment of pressure ulcers and assessment for specific care 
issues, including older patients with chronic heart failure, the physical characteristics of wounds or 
patients with pain and cognitive impairment. The implications for practice, therefore, are that if docu -
mentation is to serve as a vital communication tool between nurses and other caregivers for the 
exchange of information gathered at assessment, attention needs to be paid to ensuring there are no 
gaps in documenting patient assessment.
Conclusion
The nursing assessment of the patient is complex as it involves using different methods to gather 
information on diverse aspects of patient care across a range of acute and chronic healthcare  
situations. Nursing assessment generates information that is used to inform nursing actions and inter -
ventions. From this information, the patient’s problems are identified, further investigations to deter -
mine the cause of the problem are selected, and decisions are made about what observations need 
to be tracked and which referrals to other healthcare professionals are needed.
The pace at which nursing assessment is carried out is determined by the patient’s condition and 
whether it is an emergency, the level of patient distress, how quickly the patient’s condition is deterio -
rating, whether the patient’s condition is stable or unstable, and whether the patient is presenting with 
an acute or chronic illness. The principles of nursing assessment in this chapter are intended to serve 
as a framework to guide nurses in organising their patient assessment. The key to nursing assessment, 
however, is to listen to the patient and work towards an understanding the nature of the healthcare 
problem from the patient’s perspective.
Now visit the companion website and test yourself on this chapter:
www.wileyfundamentalseries.com/medicalnursing
References
Abbey, J., Piller, N., DeBellis, A. et al . (2004) The Abbey pain scale: a 1-minute numerical indicator for people with 
end-stage dementia. International Journal of Palliative Nursing , 10(1):6–13.
An Bord Altranais  (2002) Recording Clinical Practice: Guidance to Nurses and Midwives . Dublin: An Bord Altranais.

===== Page 10 =====

Principles of nursing assessment  Chapter 1
11Atwal, A. (2002) Nurses’ perceptions of discharge planning in acute health care: a case study in one British teaching 
hospital. Journal of Advanced Nursing , 39(5):450–8.
Bergstrom, N., Braden, B.J., Laguzza, A. & Holma, V. (1987). The Braden Scale for predicting pressure sore risk. Nursing 
Research , 36(4):205–10.
Capelastegui, A., España, P .P ., Quintana, J.M. et al . (2008) Declining length of hospital stay for pneumonia and post -
discharge outcomes. American Journal of Medicine , 121(10):845–52.
Elliott, N. (2010) ‘Mutual intacting’: a grounded theory study of clinical judgement practice issues. Journal of 
Advanced Nursing , 66(12):2711–21.
Epstein, O., Perkin, D., Cookson, J., et al . (2008). Clinical Examination , 4th ed. Edinburgh: Mosby.
Gould, D., Goldstone, L., Gammon, J., Kelly, D. & Maldwell, A. (2002) Establishing the validity of pressure ulcer risk 
assessment scales: a novel approach using illustrated patient scenarios. International Journal of Nursing Studies , 
39(2):215–28.
Kaufman, G. (2008) Patient assessment: effective consultation and history taking. Nursing Standard , 23(4):
50–6.
Kyle, G., Prynn, P ., Oliver, H. & Dunbar, T. (2005) The Eton Scale: a tool for risk assessment for constipation. Nursing 
Times , 101(18):50–1.
Lewis, S.J., & Heaton, K.W. (1997) Stool form scale as a useful guide to intestinal transit time. Scandinavian Journal 
of Gastroenterology , 32:920–4.
Longstreth, G., Thompson, W.G., Chey, W., Houghton, L., Mearin, F. & Spiller, R. (2006) Functional bowel disorders. 
Gastroenterology , 130:1480–91.
McGaughey, J., Alderdice, F., Fowler, R., Kapila, A., Mayhew, A. & Moutray, M. (2007) Outreach and Early Warning 
Systems (EWS) for the prevention of intensive care admission and death of critically ill patients on general 
hospital wards. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , (3):CD005529.
McNarry, A.F., & Goldhill, D.R. (2004). Simple bedside assessment of level of consciousness: comparison of two 
simple assessment scales with the Glasgow Coma Scale. Anaesthesia , 59:34–7.
Manchester Triage Group (2006) Emergency Triage/Manchester Triage Group , 2nd ed. London: BMJ.
Maslow, A.H. (1999) Toward a Psychology of Being . New York: Wiley.
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (2011) NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology, Distress Manage -
ment.  Version 1.2011. Retrieved 7th March 2011 from http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/
distress.pdf.
National Institute for Clinical Excellence (2004) Falls: The Assessment and Prevention of Falls in Older People . Clinical 
Guideline No. 21. London: NICE.
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2007) Acutely Ill Patients in Hospital: Recognition of and 
Response to Acute Illness in Adults in Hospital . Clinical Guideline No. 50. London: NICE.
National Patient Safety Agency (2007) Safer Care for the Acutely Ill Patient: Learning from Serious Incidents . PSO/5. 
London: National Patient Safety Agency.
Norton, D., McClaren, R. & Exton-Smith, A. (1975) An Investigation of Geriatric Nursing Problems in Hospital . Edin -
burgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Nursing and Midwifery Council (2009) Record Keeping: Guidance for Nurses and Midwives . London: NMC.
Orem, D. (2001) Nursing: Concepts of Practice , 6th ed. St Louis: Mosby.
Resuscitation Council (UK) (2010). Resuscitation Guidelines 2010 . London: Resuscitation Council UK.
Roper, N., Logan, W. & Tiereny, A. (2000) The Roper-Logan-Tierney Model of Nursing: Based on Activities of Living . 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Royal College of Nursing (2003) Manual Handling Assessments in Hospitals and the Community: An RCN Guide . 
London: RCN.
Saczynski, J.S., Lessard, D., Spencer, F.A. et al . (2010) Declining length of stay for patients hospitalized with AMI: 
impact on mortality and readmissions. American Journal of Medicine , 123(11):1007–15.
Shepperd, S., McClaran, J., Phillips, C.O., et al . (2010) Discharge planning from hospital to home. Cochrane Database 
of Systematic Reviews , (1):CD000313.
Smith, G. (2003) ALERT: Acute Life Threatening Events, Treatment and Recognition . Portsmouth: University of 
Portsmouth.
Tagney, J. (2008) Skills in taking an accurate cardiac patient history. British Journal of Cardiac Nursing , 3(1):8–13.
Teasdale, G., & Jennett, B. (1974) Assessment of coma and impaired consciousness. A practical scale. Lancet , 13(2), 
81–4.
Wang, N., Hailey, D. & Yu, P . (2011) Quality of nursing documentation and approaches to its evaluation: a mixed-method 
systematic review. Online Journal of Advanced Nursing  67:doi 10.1111/j.1365-2648.2011.05634.
Waterlow, J. (2005). Pressure Ulcer Prevention Manual . London: Wound Care Society.